
* A Project Gutenberg Canada Ebook *

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the ebook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the ebook. If either of these conditions applies, please
check gutenberg.ca/links/licence.html before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be
under copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada,
check your country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER
COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD
OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

_The Snow Queen_ was written by Hans Christian Andersen
(1805-1875), and was translated from the Danish by
M. R. James (1862-1936) as part of his
_Hans Andersen Forty-Two Stories_ (1930).

Title: Hans Andersen Forty-Two Stories -- The Snow Queen
Author: Andersen, Hans Christian (1805-1875)
Translator: James, Montague Rhodes (1862-1936)
Date of first publication: 1930
Place and date of edition used as base for this ebook:
   London: Faber and Faber, 1953
Date first posted: 28 December 2009
Date last updated: 28 December 2009
Project Gutenberg Canada ebook #442

This ebook was produced by:
David T. Jones, Mark Akrigg
& the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdpcanada.net




The Snow Queen

_A Tale in Seven Stories_

by

Hans Christian Andersen

(from _Hans Andersen Forty-Two Stories_ [1930],
translated by M. R. James)


STORY THE FIRST

_Which tells of the looking-glass and the bits of it_


Attention, please, we're going to begin. When we've got to the end of
the story we shall know more than we do now. There was a wicked troll.
He was one of the very worst sort--he was the devil. One day he was in
a very temper, for he had made a looking-glass which had this
property: that everything good and pretty that was reflected in it
shrivelled away in it to almost nothing, but everything that was no
good and looked ugly came out plain and showed even worse than it was.
The most beautiful landscapes looked like boiled spinach in the glass,
and the best of men grew hideous, or else stood on their heads and had
no stomachs. Their faces were so distorted that they couldn't be
recognized, and if anyone had a freckle, you could be sure it would
spread all over his nose and mouth. It was extra-ordinarily funny, the
devil said. If a kind pious thought passed through a man's mind, there
came such a grimace in the glass that the troll-devil couldn't but
laugh at his clever invention. Everyone who attended the troll school
(for he kept a troll school) spread the news all about that a miracle
had come to pass: you could now see, they said, what the world and
mankind really looked like. They ran about everywhere with the glass,
and at last there wasn't a country or a person left who hadn't been
distorted in it. After that they decided to fly up to heaven itself
and make fun of the angels and of God. The higher they flew with the
glass, the more it grimaced, till they could scarcely keep hold of it.
Up and up they flew, nearer to God and His angels, and then the glass
quivered so fearfully with grimacing that it fell out of their hands
and was dashed on the ground below, where it broke into hundreds of
millions, billions, and even more pieces; and that very thing made
matters worse than before, for some of the bits were hardly as big as
a grain of sand, and these flew all about in the wide world, and when
they got into peoples' eyes, they stuck there, and the people either
saw everything crooked or else had only eyes for what was wrong in
anything; for every little splinter of the glass had kept the same
power that the whole glass had. Some people even got a little bit of
the glass into their hearts, and that was horrible, for the heart
became just like a lump of ice. Some of the pieces were so big that
they were used for window glass, but it didn't pay to look at your
friends through those window-panes. Other pieces were made into
spectacles, and that was a bad business, if people put on those
spectacles in order to see correctly and judge rightly. The evil one
laughed till he split, it tickled him so. But out in the world little
bits of glass were still flying about in the air.

Now we are to hear all about it.




STORY THE SECOND

_A Little Boy and a Little Girl_


In the big town, where there are so many houses and people that there
isn't room enough for everybody to have a little garden, and where in
consequence most people have to content themselves with flowers in
pots, there were two poor children who had a garden somewhat bigger
than a flower-pot. They weren't brother and sister, but they were as
fond of each other as if they had been. Their parents were near
neighbours, living in two attics, where the roof of the one house
touched the other, and the gutter ran along the eaves: a small window
in each house faced the other; you had only to step across the gutter
and you could get from one window to the other.

The parents had, each of them, a large wooden box outside the window,
and in it grew kitchen herbs which they used, and also a little rose
tree; there was one in each box, and they flourished wonderfully. Then
the parents thought of putting the boxes across the gutter in such a
way that they reached almost from the one window to the other and
really looked like two bunches of flowers. The pea plants hung down
over the boxes, and the rose trees put out long branches and twined
about the windows and bent over to meet each other, and made almost a
triumphal arch of leaves and blossoms. The boxes were very high up,
and the children knew they must not climb up into them, but they were
often allowed to get out to meet each other and sit on their little
stools beneath the roses, and there they used to play very happily.

In winter, of course, that pleasure was gone. The windows were often
quite frozen over; but then they would heat copper pennies on the
stove, and then put the hot pennies on the frosty pane, and there came
a beautiful peep-hole, as round as round, behind which peeped out a
blessed little kind eye, one out of each window; the little boy's and
the little girl's. He was called Kay and she Gerda. In summer they
could get to each other with a single jump, in winter they had first
to go down a lot of stairs and then up a lot of stairs, while the snow
came drifting down outside.

"Those are the white bees swarming," said the old grandmother.

"Have they got a queen too?" asked the little boy--for he knew that
the real bees have one. "Indeed, they have," said grandmother, "she
flies where they swarm thickest; she is the biggest of them all, and
she never stays still on the ground, but flies up again into the black
cloud. Many a winter night she flies through the streets of the town
and peeps in at the windows, and then they freeze into wonderful
patterns like flowers."

"Yes, I've seen that," said both the children; and they knew it was
true. "Can the Snow Queen get in here?" asked the little girl.

"Let her come!" said the boy, "and I'll put her on the hot stove and
she'll melt." But grandmother stroked his hair and told them stories
about other things.

In the evening, when little Kay was at home, and half undressed, he
climbed up on the stool by the window and peeped through the little
hole. A few snowflakes were falling outside, and one of them, the
biggest of them all, remained lying in a corner of one of the
flower-boxes. This flake grew larger and larger, and at last turned
into the complete shape of a lady, dressed in the finest white gauze,
which seemed to be made out of millions of star-shaped flakes. She was
very pretty and delicate, but she was of ice, blinding, dazzling ice;
yet she was alive. Her eyes gazed out like two bright stars, but there
was no rest or quietness in them. She nodded towards the window and
beckoned with her hand. The little boy was frightened and jumped down
off the stool; and then it seemed as if a large bird flew past the
window.

Next day was clear and frosty, and then came a thaw, and after that
came spring-time, and the sun shone and the green buds peeped forth;
the swallows built their nests, the windows were open, and the
children sat once more in their little garden high up in the gutter in
the topmost story.

That summer the roses blossomed as never before. The little girl had
learnt a hymn in which there was something about roses, and at the
mention of them she thought of her own, and she sang the hymn to the
little boy and he sang it too.

    _The roses grow in the valley,
    Where we meet the Jesus Child._

The little ones held each other by the hand and kissed the roses and
gazed into God's bright sunshine and spoke to it as if the child Jesus
were there. What lovely summer days were those, and how blessed it was
to be out among the fresh rose bushes, which seemed as if they would
never leave off blossoming!

Kay and Gerda were sitting looking at a picture book with beasts and
birds in it, and then--just as the clock in the great church tower was
striking five--Kay said, "Oh! Something pricked my heart, and I've
just got something in my eye!"

The little girl put her arm round his neck, and he winked his eye, but
no, there was nothing to be seen. "I think it's gone," he said, but it
wasn't. It was one of those tiny bits that were broken off the glass,
the troll-glass--you remember about that--that horrid glass which made
everything great and good that was reflected in it become mean and
ugly, while the evil nasty things came out, and every blemish was
plain to be seen. Poor Kay! He had got a piece of it right into his
heart, which would soon be like a lump of ice. For the moment it
wasn't doing any harm; still, there it was.

"What are you crying for?" he asked. "It makes you look horrid!
There's nothing the matter with me. Ugh!" he called out suddenly.
"That rose there's worm-eaten! And look at that other, it's all
crooked. Rotten roses they are, after all, like the boxes they're
in." With that he gave the box a hard kick and pulled off the two
roses. "What are you doing, Kay?" cried the little girl; and when he
saw she was frightened, he pulled off a third rose, and ran in at his
own window, leaving dear little Gerda. Later, when she brought him the
picture book, he said, "it was only fit for babies", and when
grandmother told them stories, he was always breaking in with a "But".
And if he could he would follow her about with spectacles on and
imitate her talking; it was exactly like, and made people laugh. Very
soon he could imitate the walk and talk of everybody in their street.
Everything that was odd or not nice about them Kay could mimic, and
people said, "That boy's got an uncommon wit, to be sure". But it was
the bit of glass he had got in his eye and the bit he had in his
heart; and so it came about that he would tease even little Gerda, who
loved him with all her heart. The games he played were quite different
now: they were very clever. One winter day, when the snow-flakes were
drifting down, he brought a big magnifying glass and held out the
corner of his blue jacket and let the flakes fall on it.

"Now look through the glass, Gerda," he said; and there was every
flake made much bigger, and looking like a beautiful flower or a
ten-pointed star: lovely it was to see. "Look how clever it is," said
Kay, "it's much more interesting than the real flowers are; and
there's not a single thing wrong with them, they're perfectly
accurate--if only they didn't melt."

A little later Kay came in with big mittens on, and his sledge hung on
his back; he shouted to Gerda, right in her ear, "I've got leave to
drive in the big square where the others are playing," and he was off.

Out there in the square the boldest of the boys often used to tie
their sledges to a farmer's cart and drive a good long way with it. It
was excellent fun. At the height of their sport a large sledge came
by; it was painted white all over, and in it was someone wrapped in a
shaggy white fur and wearing a shaggy white cap. This sledge drove
twice round the square, and little Kay made haste and tied his own
little sledge to it, and drove off with it. Faster and faster it went,
into the next street. The driver turned his head and nodded to Kay in
a friendly way; it seemed as if they knew each other. Every time Kay
thought of loosing his sledge the driver nodded again, so Kay stayed
where he was: and they drove right out through the town gate. Then
the snow began to fall so thick that the boy couldn't see his hand
before him as he drove on; and he hastily loosed the rope so as to let
go of the big sledge. But it made no difference, his little trap held
fast to it, and it went like the wind. He called out loudly, but no
one heard, and the snow drifted down and the sledge flew onward.
Sometimes it made a bound as if it were going over ditches or fences.
He was in a dreadful fright; he tried to say the Lord's Prayer, but he
could only remember the multiplication table.

The snow-flakes grew bigger and bigger, till at last they looked like
large white hens; suddenly they parted, the big sledge pulled up, and
the person who was driving in it rose. The fur and the cap were all of
snow: it was a lady, tall and slender, shining white--the Snow Queen.

"We have travelled well," said she; "but you mustn't freeze. Creep
into my bearskin." She put him beside her in the sledge, and he felt
as if he were sinking into a snow-drift. "Are you still cold?" she
asked, and kissed him on the forehead. Ugh! it was colder than ice,
and struck straight to his heart--which itself was almost a lump of
ice. He felt as if he was dying, but only for a moment: then all was
right, he didn't notice the cold about him any more.

"My sledge! Don't leave my sledge behind!" that was the first thing he
remembered: so it was tied on to one of the white hens, which flew
after them with the sledge on its back. Once more the Snow Queen
kissed Kay, and he had forgotten little Gerda and grandmother and
everyone at home.

"No more kisses now," said she, "or I should kiss you to death." Kay
looked at her; very pretty she was; a cleverer, fairer face he could
not imagine. She didn't seem now to be of ice, as she was when she sat
outside the window and beckoned him. In his eyes she was perfect, and
he felt no fear. He told how he knew mental arithmetic, and with
fractions, too, and the area of the country, and how many inhabitants,
and she smiled all the time, till he thought that what he knew didn't
come to much. He gazed up into the immense spaces of the air, and she
flew on with him, flew high among the dark clouds, and the storm wind
whistled and roared as if it were singing old ballads. Over forest and
lake they flew, over sea and land: below them the cold blast whistled,
the wolves howled, the snow sparkled; above them flew the black
cawing crows, but over all shone the moon, large and bright; and by
its light Kay watched through the long long winter night; by day he
slumbered at the feet of the Snow Queen.




STORY THE THIRD

_The Flower Garden of the Old Woman who knew Magic_


But how fared little Gerda when Kay came back no more? Where could he
be? Nobody knew, nobody could tell. The boys could only say they had
seen him tie his little sledge to another fine large one which had
driven down the street and out at the town gate. Nobody knew where he
was. Many tears were shed; sore and long did little Gerda weep. Then
they said he was dead, drowned in the river that ran past the town.
Dark indeed and long were those winter days.

Then came spring with warmer sunshine.

"Kay is dead and gone," said little Gerda.

"I don't believe it," said the Sunshine.

"He's dead and gone," said she to the swallows.

"I don't believe it," they answered, and at last little Gerda didn't
believe it either.

"I'll put on my new red shoes," she said one morning early, "the ones
Kay has never seen, and I'll go down to the river and ask about him."

It was quite early. She kissed her old grandmother as she slept, put
on the red shoes, and went out of the gate to the river, quite alone.

"Is it true that you have taken my little playfellow? I'll give my red
shoes if you'll give him back to me."

The waves, she thought, nodded in a queer fashion; so she took her gay
red shoes, the most precious thing she had, and threw them both into
the river, but they fell close into the bank, and the little waves
carried them straight back to her on shore. It seemed that the river
would not take the most precious thing she had because it had not got
little Kay. But she thought she hadn't thrown the shoes far enough
out, so she climbed into a boat that lay in the rushes, and went out
to the further end of it and threw out the shoes. But the boat was
not moored fast, and with the movement she made it floated away from
the shore. She noticed this and made haste to get out, but before she
could get back the boat was more than a fathom away, and began to
drift more quickly along. Little Gerda was very much frightened and
began to cry; but nobody heard her except the sparrows, and they
couldn't carry her ashore; but they flew along the bank and sang, as
if to comfort her: "Here we are, here we are!" The boat was carried
downstream; little Gerda sat still, in her stockinged feet; her little
red shoes floated behind, but couldn't reach the boat, which was now
travelling faster.

Both banks were very pretty, with beautiful flowers, old trees, and
sloping fields with sheep and cows; but never a man was to be seen.

"Perhaps the river will carry me to little Kay," thought Gerda. This
put her in better spirits, and she stood up and for many hours gazed
at the pretty green banks. At last she came to a large cherry orchard,
in which was a little house with quaint blue and red windows, and for
the rest a thatched roof, and outside two wooden soldiers, who were
shouldering arms for everyone who came sailing by. Gerda called to
them, thinking they were alive: but very naturally they didn't answer.
She came quite near them; the river carried the boat straight towards
the shore. Gerda called out yet louder, and then there came out of the
house an old old woman, supporting herself on a crooked stick. She had
a large sun-hat on, painted with the most splendid flowers.

"Poor dear little child," said the old woman, "how ever did you get
out here on this great big river, far out into the wide world?" And
with that the old woman stepped into the water and hooked her stick
fast to the boat and pulled it ashore and lifted little Gerda out.
Gerda was glad to be on dry land again, but still she was a little
afraid of the strange old woman. "Come now, and tell me who you are,
and how you got here," she said. And Gerda told her everything; and
the old woman shook her head and said, "Hm, hm!" And when Gerda had
told her everything and asked if she had seen little Kay, the woman
said he hadn't passed that way, but he would come, sure enough, and
she wasn't to be worried, but must taste her cherries, and look at her
flowers, that were prettier than any picture book and could each of
them tell a whole story. Then she took Gerda by the hand, and they
went into the little house, and the old woman locked the door.

The windows were placed very high up, and the glass in them was red
and blue and yellow. The daylight shone very oddly through them, with
all their colours; but on the table were the most beautiful cherries,
and Gerda ate as many as she liked, for she was allowed to; and while
she was eating, the old woman combed her hair with a gold comb, and
the hair curled and shone lovely and yellow about her kind little
face, the round face that looked like a rose.

"I've been longing for a sweet little girl like you," said the old
woman, "you'll see how well we two shall get on," and all the time she
was combing little Gerda's hair Gerda was forgetting more and more her
foster brother Kay: for the old woman was skilled in witchcraft, but
she wasn't a wicked witch, she only used witchcraft a little, for her
own pleasure, and just now she wanted very much to keep little Gerda.
In order to do so, she went out into the garden and stretched out her
hooked stick towards all the rose bushes: and though they were all
blooming beautifully, they all sank down into the black earth and you
couldn't see where they had been. The old woman was afraid that when
Gerda saw the roses she would think of her own roses, and then
remember little Kay and run away.

Then she took Gerda out into the flower garden. Dear me! What
fragrance and beauty there was there. All the flowers one could think
of, flowers belonging to every season, stood there in their full
bloom; no picture book could be more gaily coloured and pretty. Gerda
jumped for joy and played about till the sun set behind the tall
cherry trees. Then she was given a lovely bed with red silk pillows
that were stuffed with blue violets, and there she slept and dreamt as
beautiful dreams as any queen on her wedding day.

Next day she played among the flowers again in the hot sunshine; and
so many days went by. Gerda knew every flower, but, many as there were
of them, she thought that one was missing, but she didn't know which.
Then, one day she was sitting looking at the old woman's sun-hat with
the flowers painted on it, and the prettiest of all that were there
was a rose. The old woman had forgotten to take it away from her hat
when she got rid of the others in the garden. It only shows what comes
of not having your wits about you. "Why!" said Gerda, "aren't there
any roses?" And she ran in among the beds and looked and looked, but
there were none to be found. Then she sat down and cried; but her hot
tears fell exactly on the spot where a rose tree had sunk down, and
when the tears wetted the ground the tree rose up all at once,
blossoming just as when it sank down, and Gerda threw her arms round
it and kissed the roses, and thought of the beautiful ones at home,
and with them of little Kay.

"Oh, how I have been dawdling," said the little girl. "I was to find
Kay--don't know where he is?" she asked the roses, "do you think he's
dead and gone?" "Dead he isn't," said the roses. "We've been down in
the ground where all the dead people are, but Kay wasn't there."

"Thanks, thanks," said little Gerda, and went off to the other flowers
and looked into their cups and asked: "Do you know where little Kay
is?"

But every one of the flowers was standing in the sun and dreaming its
own story or life and of these little Gerda heard ever so many; but
none of them knew anything about Kay.

What said the tiger lily?

"Do you hear the drum! boom! boom! There are only two notes! Boom!
Boom! Hark to the women's dirge! Hark to the cry of the priests! In
her long red robe the Indian woman stands on the pyre, and the flames
rise round her and her dead husband; but the woman is thinking of the
living one who stands there in the circle, of him whose eyes burn
hotter than the flames, the fire of whose eyes pierces nearer her
heart than the flames which will quickly burn her body to ashes. Can
the heart's flame perish in the flames of the pyre?"

"I don't understand that in the least," said little Gerda.

"That's my story," said the tiger lily.

What says the bindweed?

"High above the narrow field-path hangs an ancient castle. Thick
evergreens grow about the old red walls, leaf on leaf, away up to the
balcony, and there stands a fair maiden. She bends over the parapet
and looks down upon the road. No rose hangs fresher on its spray than
she, no apple blossom borne by the breeze from its tree floats more
gracefully. How her costly silken kirtle rustles! Cometh he not?"

"Is it Kay you mean?" asked little Gerda.

"I'm only talking of my story, my dream," the bindweed answered.

What says the little snowdrop?

"Between the trees the long board hangs in the ropes. It's a swing:
two pretty little girls--their frocks white as snow, and long green
silk ribbons fluttering from their hats--are sitting and swinging.
Their brother, who is bigger than they, is standing up in the swing,
with his arm round the ropes to steady himself, for in one hand he has
a little saucer and in the other a clay pipe, and he's blowing soap
bubbles. To and fro goes the swing, and the bubbles float with lovely
changing colours; the last one is still hanging to the pipe-stem and
swaying in the breeze; on goes the swing. The little black dog, as
light as the bubbles, stands on his hind legs and wants to get into
the swing too; it flies past, he tumbles down, and barks, and is
angry. They laugh at him--the bubbles burst. A swinging plank, a
waving picture in foam! That is my song."

"I suppose it's very pretty, what you're talking about, but you say it
so sadly, and you never mention Kay."

What do the hyacinths say?

"There were three fair sisters, delicate and fine; the robe of one was
red, the second's was blue, and the third's all white. Hand in hand
they danced by the still lake in the bright moonlight. They were no
elfin maidens, but of the children of men. There came a waft of
fragrance, and the maidens vanished in the forest. Stronger grew the
perfume. Three coffins, wherein the three fair maidens lay, glided
from the depths of the forest, glided over the lake. Fireflies flew
round them like tiny evening lamps. The dancing maidens, do they
slumber or are they dead? The scent of the flowers tells that they are
dead. The evening bell rings out over the dead."

"You make me quite wretched!" said little Gerda. "Your scent is so
strong, I can't help thinking of the dead maidens. Oh, dear! Is little
Kay really dead? The roses have been down in the ground and they say
'No'."

"Ding, dong!" rang out the hyacinth bells. "We're not ringing for
little Kay, we don't know him, we're only singing our own song, the
only one we know."

So Gerda went to the buttercup, shining out from among its brilliant
green leaves. "You're a bright little sun," said Gerda; "tell me if
you know where I can find my playfellow." The buttercup shone very
prettily and looked back at Gerda. What song, now, could the buttercup
sing? Not one about Kay, at any rate.

"In a little yard God's sun was shining warm on the first day of
spring; its beams crept down the neighbour's white wall; close by grew
the first yellow flowers, shining like gold in the hot sunbeams. The
old grandmother was out of doors in her chair; her pretty
grand-daughter, the poor servant maid, came home upon a short visit,
and gave her grandmother a kiss. There was gold, beautiful gold in
that blessed kiss, gold on the lips, gold in the heart, gold up there
in the early morn. Look, that's my little story," said the buttercup.

"Oh, my poor old granny!" sighed Gerda. "Yes, she must be longing for
me, and unhappy about me, as she was about little Kay. But I'll soon
be home again and bring Kay with me. It's no good asking the flowers;
they only know their own song and tell me nothing." So she tucked up
her little frock to run the quicker. But the narcissus hit against her
leg as she jumped over it, and she stopped and looked at the tall
flower and asked: "Do you happen to know anything?" And she stooped
down to it; and what did it say?

"I can see myself! I can see myself!" said the narcissus. "Oh, how
strong my scent is! Up in the little garret stands a little
ballet-girl half dressed--standing first on one leg she is, then on
both, and kicking out at the whole world--she's only an illusion.
She's pouring water out of a teapot on to a bit of stuff that she's
holding; it's her stays. Cleanliness is a good thing. The white frock
hangs on its peg, it too has been washed in the teapot and dried on
the roof. She puts it on, and a saffron yellow kerchief about her
neck, which makes the dress shine whiter. Legs up in the air! Look how
she stands on a stalk! I can see myself, I can see myself!"

"I don't care about that in the least," said Gerda, "it's no use
telling me that." So she ran to the border of the garden; the door was
locked, but she twisted at the rusty staple till it came away, and the
door flew open, and then out ran little Gerda barefoot into the wide
world. Thrice she looked back, but there was nobody coming after her.
At last she could run no further, and sat down on a big stone, and
when she looked about her, why, summer was over and it was late
autumn. You couldn't see that inside that beautiful garden, where
there was always sunshine and flowers of all seasons bloomed.

"Good heavens! How I have dawdled!" said the Gerda. "It's autumn now.
I daren't rest a minute!" So she got up and went on.

Oh, how bruised and tired were her little feet, and how cold and raw
it was all round! The long leaves of the willow were pale yellow, and
the mist dripped off them in waterdrops; one leaf after another fell,
and only the sloe bush had kept its fruit--sour fruit that dried up
your mouth. Oh, how grey and dismal it was out in the wide world!




STORY THE FOURTH

_A Prince and Princess_


Gerda had to rest herself again. And there, hopping over the road
right in front of where she sat, was a large crow. For a long time it
had sat and looked at her with its head on one side, and now it said,
"Kra, Kra--Goo'day, Goo'day!"--it couldn't say it any better, but it
meant very kindly by the little girl, and asked where she was going
all alone in the wide world. The words "all alone" Gerda understood
very well, and felt how much they meant; so she told the crow all the
story of her life and asked if it had seen Kay. The crow nodded very
thoughtfully, and said, "Maybe, maybe." "What? Do you think you have?"
the little girl cried, and almost squeezed the crow to death, she
kissed it so hard.

"Gently! Gently!" said the crow. "I think it may be little Kay, but if
so, he's quite forgotten you for the Princess."

"Does he live with a Princess?" asked Gerda.

"Yes, listen," said the crow, "but I find it so hard to talk your
speech. If you can understand crow-talk I can tell you better."

"No, I haven't learnt it," said Gerda, "but Granny knew it, and knew
P-talk too. I wish I'd learnt it."

"Doesn't matter," said the crow, "I'll tell you as well as I can, but
I shall make a poor business of it." So it told what it knew.

"In the kingdom where we are now there lives a Princess who is
exceedingly clever; besides, she's read all the newspapers in the
world and forgotten 'em again, she's so clever. The other day she was
sitting on her throne, which isn't much fun after all, people say; and
she happened to hum a song which was 'Heigh-ho for a husband!' 'Why,
there's something in that,' said she, and she made up her mind to
marry; only she would have a husband who knew how to answer when you
talked to him, one that didn't merely stand there and look
distinguished; that's very dull. So she had all the court ladies
drummed up, and when they heard what she wanted, they were delighted.
'I do like that,' they said, 'we were just thinking something of the
sort the other day.' Now you may be sure every word I'm telling you is
true,' said the crow, 'for I've got a sweetheart who's tame and goes
everywhere about the palace, and she told me the whole thing.' Of
course, the sweetheart was a crow too, for crow seeks his mate, and
the mate's always a crow.

"The newspapers came out immediately with a border of hearts and the
Princess's monogram, and you could read there how it was open to any
good-looking young man to come up to the palace and speak with the
Princess, and the one that spoke so you could see he was at home
there, and talked the best, the Princess would take him for husband.
Yes, indeed," said the crow, "you may take it from me, as sure as I
sit here, the people came streaming in: there was a crowd and a
commotion, but nothing came of it, either the first day or the second.
They could all of them talk well enough while they were out in the
street, but when they came in by the palace gate and saw the guards in
silver, and footmen in gold, all up the stairs, and the big halls all
lighted up, they were flabbergasted, and when they stood in front of
the throne where the Princess was sitting, they couldn't think of
anything to say but the last word she had said, and she didn't care
about hearing that over again. It was just as if the people in there
had got snuff into their stomachs and were stupefied till they got out
into the street again, and they could talk. There was a row of them
reaching right away from the town gate to the palace. I went there
myself to look at it," said the crow. "They got hungry and thirsty
too, but they got nothing from the palace, not even so much as a glass
of luke-warm water. Some of the cleverest, to be sure, had brought a
bit of bread and butter with them, but they didn't give their
neighbours any: they thought to themselves: 'Just let him look hungry
and the Princess won't have him.'"

"But Kay, little Kay," asked Gerda. "When did he come? Was he among
all those people?" "Give me time, give me time! Now we are getting to
him. It was the third day, and there came a little fellow without
horse or carriage, marching quite cheerfully straight up to the
palace. His eyes shone like gems and he had lovely long hair, but his
clothes were shabby."

"It was Kay," Gerda cried out joyfully. "Oh, then I've found him!" And
she clapped her hands.

"He had a little bundle on his back," the crow said.

"Ah, that must have been his sledge," said Gerda, "for he went off
with his sledge." "It might quite well be that," said the crow. "I
didn't look very close at it, but I know from my tame sweetheart that
when he came in at the palace gate and saw the lifeguards in silver
and the footmen in gold all up the stairs, he wasn't in the least
taken aback, but nodded and said to them: 'It must be dull standing on
the stairs. I'd sooner go in.' The halls were shining with lights, and
privy councillors and excellencies were walking barefoot and carrying
golden dishes; it was enough to make anybody feel solemn. His boots
creaked dreadfully loud, but he wasn't frightened a bit." "That's
certainly Kay," said Gerda. "I know he'd got some new boots, I heard
them creak in Granny's room."

"Yes, creak they did," said the crow, "and as bold as could be he
walked straight into the Princess, who was sitting on a pearl as big
as a spinning-wheel, and all the court ladies with their maids and
their maids' maids, and all the courtiers with their men and their
men's men, who keep a page, were stationed all around, and the nearer
they stood to the door the prouder they looked: the men's men's page,
who always wears slippers, can hardly be looked at, he's so proud
standing there at the door."

"That must be frightening," said little Gerda, "and yet Kay won the
Princess!"

"If I hadn't been a crow I'd have taken her myself, though I am
engaged. He spoke, it seems, every bit as well as I do when I speak
crow-talk, so my tame sweetheart tells me. He was cheerful and
nice-looking. He hadn't come courting at all, but only to hear the
Princess's conversation, and he thought well of it, and she thought
well of him."

"Oh, yes! Certainly it's Kay," said Gerda. "He was clever: he knew
mental arithmetic with fractions. Oh, won't you take me into the
palace?"

"It's easy enough to say that," said the crow, "but how are we to
manage it? I must talk to my tame sweetheart about it, she's sure to
be able to advise us; for I must tell you that a little girl like you
will never be allowed to come right in."

"Oh, yes, I shall," said Gerda. "When Kay hears I'm here, he'll come
out directly and fetch me." "Well, wait for me here at the stile,"
said the crow, and put his head on one side and flew off. Only when it
was dark did the crow come back. "Rax! rax!" said he. "She sends you
her best compliments, and here's a small loaf for you which she took
from the kitchen: there's lots of bread there, and I'm sure you're
hungry. It's not possible for you to get into the palace: why, you're
barefoot, and the guards in silver and the footmen in gold wouldn't
allow it; but don't cry, you shall get in all the same. My sweetheart
knows of a little backstair that leads to the bedroom, and she knows
where she can get the key."

They went into the garden, up the great avenue where one leaf after
another was falling; and when the lights in the palace were put out
one by one the crow led little Gerda across to a back door which stood
ajar.

Oh, how Gerda's heart beat with anxiety and longing! She felt as if
she was going to do something wrong, yet all she wanted was to know if
it was little Kay; why, it must be he; she imagined so vividly his
clever eyes and his long hair; she could actually see how he would
smile when they were sitting at home beneath the roses. He would, of
course, be overjoyed to see her and to hear what a long way she had
come for his sake, and how everyone at home had grieved when he didn't
come back. How anxious and how glad she was!

They were now at the stairs: a little lamp was burning in a stand: in
the middle of the floor stood the tame crow, turning her head this way
and that, and contemplating Gerda, who curtsied as her grandmother had
taught her to do.

"My betrothed has spoken most charmingly of you, my little lady," said
the tame crow, "and your biography, as we may call it, is also very
touching. If you will take the lamp, I will lead the way. We shall go
by the shortest way, where we shall meet no one."

"I think someone is coming after us," said Gerda. Something came
rushing by, as it were shadows passing along the wall, horses with
fluttering manes and slender legs, huntsmen and lords and ladies on
horseback.

"They're only dreams," said the crow, "they come and fetch the
Quality's thoughts out a-hunting, and it's a good thing; you can look
at them in bed all the better. Only let me see, if you come to honour
and distinction, that you bear a thankful heart."

"Oh, there's no use talking about that," said the crow from the
forest.

They now entered the first chamber, which was of rose-red satin with
worked flowers on the walls; here the dreams were already darting past
them, but they went so quick that Gerda could not manage to see the
Quality. Each chamber was handsomer than the last, it was enough to
bewilder anyone; and now they were in the bedchamber. The roof of this
was made like a palm tree with leaves of glass--costly glass--and in
the middle of the floor there hung from a thick stem of gold two beds,
each made to look like a lily; one was white, and in it lay the
Princess; the other was red, and there it was that Gerda must look for
little Kay. She bent aside one of the red leaves, and there she saw a
brown neck--oh, it was Kay. She called his name aloud and held the
lamp over him. The dreams dashed back into the room, galloping--he
woke, turned his head, and--it wasn't little Kay.

The Prince was only like him in the neck, but he was young and
handsome, and out of the white lily bed the Princess peeped and asked
what was the matter. Then little Gerda burst into tears and told her
whole story and all that the crows had done for her.

"Poor little dear!" said the Prince and the Princess, and they praised
the crows and said they were not at all displeased with them, but all
the same they mustn't do it again. Meanwhile they should be rewarded.
"Would you like to go free?" the Princess asked, "or would you like a
permanent situation as court crows, with everything that is dropped in
the kitchen?"

Both crows bowed and asked for permanent situations, for they had
their old age in mind, and, said they, "It's a very good thing to have
something in store for the old man". That was their phrase. The Prince
got up out of his bed and let Gerda sleep in it, and he couldn't do
more than that! She clasped her little hands and said: "How kind
people and animals are." And then she shut her eyes and slept
deliciously. All the dreams came flying back, and now they looked like
angels of God, and they were drawing a little sledge, and in it sat
Kay, nodding to her: but it was all only dreams, and so it was gone
again as soon as she woke up.

Next day she was dressed out in silk and velvet from top to toe and
invited to stay at the palace and enjoy herself; but she begged only
to have a little carriage and horse, and a pair of little boots, and
she would drive out again into the wide world and find Kay. She was
given both boots and a muff, and was dressed out very nicely, and when
she was to set off a new carriage of pure gold drew up at the door.
The arms of the Prince and Princess shone like a star on it. The
coachmen and servants and outriders (there were outriders too) wore
gold crowns. The Prince and Princess helped her into the carriage
themselves and wished her the best of luck. The forest crow, who was
now married, went with her for the first twelve miles, sitting beside
her, for he couldn't stand being driven backwards. The other crow
stood in the doorway and flapped her wings; she couldn't come with
them, for she was suffering from a headache since she had obtained a
permanent situation and too much to eat. Inside, the coach had a
provision of sugar twists, and inside the seat was fruit and
gingerbread nuts. "Good-bye, good-bye!" shouted the Prince and
Princess. Little Gerda cried, and the crow cried, and so it went for
the first few miles. Then the crow said, "Good-bye" and that was the
hardest parting. He flew up into a tree and flapped his black wings as
long as he could see the carriage, that shone as bright as the
sunshine.




STORY THE FIFTH

_The Little Robber Girl_


They were driving through the dark forest, but the coach shone like a
blaze, and dazzled the eyes of the robbers and they couldn't stand it.
"It's gold, it's gold!" they shouted, and dashed out and seized the
horses, killed the little postilions and the coachman, and the
servants, and dragged little Gerda out of the carriage.

"She's fat, she's dainty, she's been fed up with nut kernels," said
the old robber woman, who had a long coarse beard and eye-brows that
hung down over her eyes; "she's as good as a little house-lamb; aha,
how good she'll taste!" With that she drew her bright knife, and it
shone frightfully.

"Ow!" said the old hag all at once. She'd been bitten in the ear by
her own little daughter, who was hanging on her back, and was so wild
and rough as never was. "Nasty brat!" said her mother, and had no time
to kill Gerda.

"She shall play with me," said the little robber girl, "she will give
me her muff and her nice frock and sleep with me in my bed." She gave
her mother another bite, so that the old hag jumped in the air and
twisted right round, and all the robbers laughed and said: "Look at
her dancing with her young 'un."

"I'm going to go in the coach," said the little robber girl, and she
must and would have her way, so spoilt and obstinate she was. She and
Gerda sat in it and drove over stumps and thorn-bushes, deep into the
forest. The little robber girl was as big as Gerda, but stronger,
broader in the shoulders and dark-skinned. Her eyes were quite black
and had a rather sorrowful expression. She put her arm about little
Gerda and said: "They shan't kill you as long as I don't get cross
with you: of course, you're a Princess?"

"No," said little Gerda, and told her everything that had happened to
her, and how fond she was of little Kay. The robber girl looked at her
very gravely and nodded her head and said: "They shan't kill you even
if I do get cross with you; I'll do it myself." And she dried Gerda's
eyes and put both her hands into the pretty muff that was so soft and
warm.

The coach stopped. They were in the court of a robber's castle. It had
split from top to bottom. Ravens and crows flew out of the holes in
the wall, and the big bulldogs, each of which looked as if he could
swallow a man, leapt high in the air but didn't bark, for they weren't
allowed to. In the great old sooty hall a large fire was burning in
the middle of the stone floor; the smoke mounted to the vault and had
to find its own way out. A large copper was on the boil, with soup,
and hares and rabbits were turning on the spit.

"You shall sleep to-night with me and all my pets," said the robber
girl. They had something to eat and drink, and then went off into a
corner where straw and blankets were lying: up above, about a hundred
pigeons were perched on laths and poles. They seemed to be all asleep,
but they stirred a little when the girls came there.

"Those are all mine," said the little robber girl. She seized one of
the nearest and held it by the legs and shook it till it flapped its
wings. "Kiss it," she cried, buffeting Gerda in the face with it.
"There sit the wood rubbish," she went on, pointing behind a number of
slats nailed in front of a hole higher up. "Wood rubbish they are,
those two. They'd fly off at once if they hadn't been locked up safe;
and there's my own old sweetheart Bae." She pulled out a reindeer by
the horn: he had a bright ring of copper on his neck and was tethered
up. "We have to keep him tight too, else he'd go bounding away from
us. Every blessed night I tickle him in the neck with my sharp knife,
and it frightens him awfully," and the little girl pulled a long knife
out of a crack in the wall and slid it along the reindeer's neck. The
poor beast kicked out with his legs and the robber girl laughed, and
then pulled Gerda into bed with her.

"Do you want the knife with you when you go to sleep?" Gerda asked,
looking at it rather nervously.

"I always sleep with my knife by me," said the little robber girl,
"you never know what may happen. But now tell me again what you told
me about little Kay, and why you've come out into the wide world." So
Gerda told it again from the beginning, and the wood-pigeons cooed up
in their cage, and the other pigeons slept. The little robber girl put
her arms round Gerda's neck, holding her knife in her other hand, and
slept--you could hear her--but Gerda couldn't even shut her eyes; she
didn't know whether she was to live or die. The robbers sat round the
fire and sang and drank, and the old hag turned head over heels. It
was a frightful sight for the little girl to see.

Then the wood-pigeons said: "Coo, Coo! We have seen little Kay. A
white hen was carrying his sledge, and he was sitting in the Snow
Queen's carriage which was flying low above the forest where we lay in
the nest. She breathed on us young ones and all of them died but us
two. Coo! Coo!" "What are you saying up there?" cried Gerda. "Where
did the Snow Queen drive to? Do you know anything about it?"

"She drove to Lapland for sure, for there's always snow and ice there.
Just ask the reindeer that's tied by the rope there."

"There is ice and snow, it's lovely and pleasant there," said the
reindeer. "There you can run about free in the great shining valleys.
The Snow Queen has her summer pavilion there, but her strong castle is
up by the North Pole, on the island that's called Spitzbergen."

"Oh, Kay, dear little Kay!" sighed Gerda.

"Now just you lie still," said the robber girl, "else you'll get a
knife in your belly." In the morning Gerda told her everything the
wood-pigeons had said, and the little robber girl looked very grave,
but nodded and said: "It's all one, it's all one. Do you know where
Lapland is?" she asked the reindeer.

"Who should know better than I?" said the beast, his eyes dancing in
his head. "I was bred and born there, and it's there I used to bound
over the snowfields."

"Look here," said the robber girl to Gerda, "all our menfolk are out,
you see, but mother's here still and here she'll be; but later in the
morning she'll drink out of the big bottle and have a little nap
after; and then I'll do something for you." She jumped out of bed, ran
across to her mother and pulled her by the beard, and said, "Good
morning to my own dear nanny goat". And her mother flipped her under
the nose till it turned red and blue, but it was all done out of pure
affection.

Well, when her mother had had a drink out of the bottle and was taking
a little nap, the robber girl went to the reindeer and said: "I should
awfully like to give you a lot more ticklings with my sharp knife, for
you're very funny when I do; but no matter for that, I'm going to
loose your tether and help you off, so that you can run to Lapland.
But you must put your best foot foremost and take the little girl for
me to the Snow Queen's palace where her playfellow is. You've heard
what she told me, for she talked quite loud enough, and you were
eavesdropping."

The reindeer jumped for joy. The robber girl lifted little Gerda up
and had the forethought to tie her fast, and even give her a little
pad to sit on. "It don't matter," said she. "Here are your fur boots,
for it'll be cold, but your muff I shall keep, it's much too pretty.
All the same, you shan't be frozen. Here's my mother's big mittens
that reach up to your elbow, shove 'em on. Now your hands look just
like my ugly old mother's."

Gerda cried for joy.

"I hate your whimpering," said the little robber girl. "Why, you ought
to look really happy; and there's two loaves for you, and a ham, so
you shan't starve." Both these were tied to the reindeer's back. The
little robber girl opened the door, and called in all the big dogs,
and then she cut the rope with her knife and said to the reindeer:
"Off you go, but take good care of the little girl." Gerda stretched
out her hands in the big mittens to the robber girl, and said
"Good-bye", and then the reindeer bounded off over bushes and stumps
through the great forest, over marsh and moor, as fast as ever he
could. The wolves howled and the ravens screamed. In the sky there was
a noise, "Fut, fut!" It seemed as if someone were sneezing red. "Those
are my dear Northern Lights," said the reindeer, "look how they
shine." Faster and faster he ran, through day and night alike. The
loaves were eaten up and the ham too, and then--they were in Lapland.




STORY THE SIXTH

_The Lapp Woman and the Finn Woman_


They stopped at a small house, a wretched place it was. The roof
reached down to the ground, and the door was so low that the family
had to crawl on their stomachs when they wanted to get in or out.
There was nobody at home but an old Lapp woman who stood roasting fish
at an oil lamp, and the reindeer told her Gerda's story; but first his
own story, for he considered that was much more important; and Gerda
was so exhausted with the cold that she couldn't speak.

"Dear me, you poor dear creature!" said the Lapp woman. "You've got a
long way to run yet! You must travel more than four hundred miles,
into Finmark, for there it is that the Snow Queen has her
country-house and burns blue lights every blessed night. I'll write a
word or two on a dry cod, for I haven't any paper, and give it you to
take to the Finn woman up there: she can tell you more than I can." So
as soon as Gerda had got warm and had had something to eat and drink,
the Lapp woman wrote a few words on a split cod and told Gerda to take
great care of it, and then she tied her fast on the reindeer again,
and off he bounded. "Fut, fut!" the noise went on in the sky, and all
night the loveliest blue Northern Lights burned there. And then they
got to Finmark and knocked at the Finn woman's chimney, for she
hadn't a door.

There was such a heat inside that the Finn woman herself went almost
naked. She was stout and very thick made; she made haste to undo
little Gerda's clothes and took off her mittens and boots, otherwise
she would have been too hot. She laid a piece of ice on the reindeer's
head, and then read what was written on the cod-fish. Three times over
she read it, and then knew it backwards, and she put the fish into the
cooking pot, for it might just as well be eaten, and she never wasted
anything.

Then the reindeer told, first, his own story, and then little Gerda's;
and the Finn woman blinked her wise eyes, but said not a word.

"You are so clever," said the reindeer, "I know you can bind all the
winds of the world in a single thread, and when the skipper looses the
first knot he gets a good wind, and if he looses the second it blows
strong, and if he looses the third and the fourth there's a storm that
blows the forests down. Won't you give the little girl a drink, so she
can get the strength of twelve men and get the better of the Snow
Queen?"

"Strength of twelve men!" said the Finn woman. "That would be just the
thing, to be sure!" She went over to a shelf and took out a large
rolled-up skin which she unrolled; strange letters were written on it,
and the Finn woman read in it till the water trickled down her brow.
But the reindeer pleaded again so hard for little Gerda, and Gerda
gazed at the Finn woman with such beseeching eyes full of tears that
she began to blink her own eyes again, and drew the reindeer apart
into a corner, where she whispered to him, at the same time laying
fresh ice on his head.

"Little Kay is with the Snow Queen, sure enough, and finds everything
after his own wish and thought, and believes that it is the best place
in the world: but that comes of his having a splinter of glass in his
heart and a little grain of glass in his eye. They must come out, or
he will never become human again, and the Snow Queen will keep her
power over him."

"But can't you give little Gerda something to take, so that she can
get the better of it all?"

"I can give her no greater power than she has already! Don't you see
how great it is, how men and beasts alike are bound to serve her, and
how she has made her way so wonderfully in the world on her bare
feet? She must not learn of her power from us; it lies in her heart,
it lies in her being a dear innocent child. If she cannot win through
to the Snow Queen and rid little Kay of the glass, we cannot be of any
help. Ten miles from here begins the Snow Queen's garden, and you can
carry the little girl as far as that. Put her down by the large bush
that stands there in the snow with red berries on it. Don't make a
long jabber of it, and make haste back." Then the Finn woman lifted
little Gerda up on to the reindeer, and he ran off as fast as he
could.

"Oh, I haven't got my boots, I haven't got my mittens!" cried little
Gerda. She noticed it at once in the scorching cold. But the reindeer
dared not stop, and he ran till he came to the large bush with the red
berries, and then he put little Gerda down, kissed her on the mouth,
and large limpid tears ran down over the beast's cheeks. Then he ran
off back again as hard as he could. There stood poor Gerda shoeless,
without gloves, in the middle of fearful ice-cold Finmark.

She ran on as quick as she could, and then there appeared a whole
regiment of snowflakes. They had not fallen from the sky, for that was
quite clear and shining with the Northern Lights. These snowflakes ran
along the ground, and the nearer they came the larger they grew. Gerda
remembered how big and how wonderfully wrought they had looked, that
time when she looked at some snowflakes through the magnifying glass;
but here they were quite of another sort in size and dreadfulness;
they were alive, they were the Snow Queen's sentinels. They were of
the strangest shapes. Some looked like great ugly hedgehogs, others
like knots of snakes sticking their heads out and others again like
little fat bears with bristling hair. All of them were glittering
white, and all were living snowflakes.

Then little Gerda began to say the Lord's Prayer, and so fierce was
the cold that she could see her own breath coming out of her mouth
like a cloud of smoke. Thicker and thicker it grew, and shaped itself
into little bright angels who grew larger and larger when they touched
the ground. They all had helmets on their heads and spears and shields
in their hands, and more and more of them came. By the time Gerda had
finished saying her prayer there was a whole legion of them about her.
They struck at the ugly snowflakes with their spears and broke them
into hundreds of bits, and little Gerda went safely and boldly
onwards. The angels chafed her hands and feet, and she felt the cold
less, and on she went quickly towards the Snow Queen's palace.

But now we must see how little Kay's getting on. He certainly wasn't
thinking about little Gerda, and least of all that she was just
outside the palace.




STORY THE SEVENTH

_What happened in the Snow Queen's Palace, and what happened after
that_


The walls of the palace were of drifted snow, and the windows and
doors of cutting wind. More than a hundred halls there were, all just
as the snow had drifted. The largest was many miles long; all were lit
up with the bright Northern Lights, and they were vast, empty,
ice-cold and shining. There was never any merrymaking there, never so
much as a little dance for the bears, when the storms could play for
them and the polar bears walk about on their hind legs and show their
pretty manners: never a nice little party to play slap-in-the-mouth,
and rap-your-paws: never the least bit of a coffee party for the white
fox misses: empty, vast, cold it was in the halls of the Snow Queen.
The Northern Lights sent up their flames with such accuracy that you
could mark exactly where they were at their highest point and when at
their lowest. In the midst of the endless, empty hall there was a
frozen lake: it had cracked into thousands of pieces, but each piece
was so exactly similar to the next that it was like a conjuring trick.
In the centre of this the Snow Queen would sit when she was at home,
and say that she was seated in the mirror of intellect, and that it
was the only one and the best in the whole world.

Little Kay was quite blue with the cold, nay, almost black, but he
didn't notice it, for the Snow Queen had kissed the shivers out of
him, and his heart was practically a lump of ice. He went about
dragging a number of sharp-edged flat pieces of ice which he was
arranging in every possible pattern and trying to make something out
of them: just as you and I have little flat bits of wood and arrange
them in patterns--a Chinese puzzle it's called. Kay too, went on
making patterns of the most elaborate kind--the Intellectual Ice
Puzzle. To his thinking, these patterns were most remarkable and of
the very greatest importance: this was the effect of the grain of
glass that was stuck in his eye. He put together patterns to form a
written word; but he never could succeed in putting out the exact word
that he wanted, which was the word "Eternity". The Snow Queen had
said: "If you can find me that pattern, you shall be your own master,
and I'll make you a present of the whole world, and a new pair of
skates." But he couldn't manage it. "Now I'm going to whisk off to the
hot countries," said the Snow Queen. "I shall go and peep into the
black pots (those were the fiery mountains, Etna and Vesuvius they're
called). I must whiten them a bit: that's my job, and, besides, it'll
be good for the lemons and vines. So off flew the Snow Queen, and Kay
sat there all alone in the mile-long empty hall of ice, and gazed at
the bits of ice and thought and thought till he crackled; all stiff
and still he sat, you would have thought he was frozen to death.

It was at that moment that little Gerda walked into the palace through
the great gate that was made of the cutting wind: but she said her
evening prayer, and at that the winds laid themselves down as it were
to sleep, and she entered the vast empty cold hall. And there she saw
Kay and knew him, and flew and caught him by the neck, and clasped him
close and cried: "Kay! Darling little Kay! So I've found you at last!"

But there he sat quite still and stiff and cold. Then little Gerda
wept hot tears, which fell on his bosom and pierced through to his
heart and thawed that lump of ice and consumed the little bit of glass
that was there. He looked at her, and she sang the hymn:

    _The roses grow in the valley,
    Where we meet the Jesus Child._

Then Kay burst into weeping: he wept so that the grain of glass ran
down out of his eyes, and then he knew her and cried out in joy:
"Gerda! Darling little Gerda! Wherever have you been all this time,
and where have I been?" He looked about him. "How cold it is here, how
empty it is and how big!" And he held fast to Gerda, and she laughed
and cried with joy. It was all so happy that the very bits of ice
danced about for joy; and when they were tired and lay down again,
there they lay exactly in those letters which the Snow Queen had said
Kay must make up, and if he did he should be his own master and she
would give him the whole world and a new pair of skates.

And Gerda kissed his cheeks and they became rosy; she kissed his eyes
and they shone like hers; she kissed his hands and feet and he was
well and sound. The Snow Queen might come back as soon as she liked;
his release was there, written in shining bits of ice.

They took each other by the hand and walked out of the great palace.
They talked of grandmother and of the roses on the roof, and wherever
they went the winds lay still and the sun broke out; and when they
reached the bush with the red berries, there stood the reindeer
waiting for them, and he had another young doe with him, whose udder
was full, and it gave the little ones its warm milk and kissed them on
the mouth. Then the two carried Kay and Gerda, first to the Finn
woman, where they warmed themselves in the hot room and got directions
for their journey home, and then to the Lapp woman, who had made new
clothes for them and repaired Kay's sledge.

The reindeer and the doe bounded along beside them, and accompanied
them to the boundary of the country. There the first green leaves were
peeping out, and there they took leave of the reindeer and the Lapp
woman. "Good-bye!" said everybody: and now the first little birds
began to twitter, the forest had green buds on it--and out of it came
riding on a fine horse (which Gerda recognized, for it had been
harnessed to the gold coach) a young girl with a flaming red cap on
her head and pistols at her side. It was the little robber girl, who
had got tired of staying at home and meant to go, first northwards and
then some other way if she didn't like it. She knew Gerda at once and
Gerda knew her, and they were delighted. "You're a cheerful sort of
chap to trapse about after!" said she to little Kay. "I'd like to know
if you're worth anyone's running to the other end of the world on your
account!" But Gerda stroked her cheeks and asked after the Prince and
Princess.

"They've gone travelling abroad," said the robber girl. "And the
crow?" little Gerda asked.

"Oh, the crow's dead," she answered. "The tame sweetheart's a widow,
and goes about with a bit of black worsted on her leg. She keeps up a
fearful whining about it, but it's all my eye. But now, tell me how
you got on, and how you managed to get hold of him." So Gerda and Kay
both told her all the story. "And Snip-Snap-snurre-basselurre!" said
the robber girl, shook hands with them both, and promised that if ever
she passed through their town she'd come up and pay them a visit; and
then she rode off, out into the wide world.

But Kay and Gerda went on, hand in hand: and as they went, beautiful
spring was all about them with blossom and greenery. The church bells
rang out, and they saw the tall towers and the big town--the very one
where they lived--and into it they came and away to their
grandmother's door, and up the stairs and into the room, where
everything stood where it did before, and the clock was saying "Tick,
tick", and the hands turning round. But, just as they passed through
the door they were aware that they were grown people. The roses in the
gutter were flowering in at the open windows, and there were the
little stools, and Kay and Gerda sat down each on their own, and held
each other by the hand. They had forgotten the cold empty splendour of
the Snow Queen's palace as if it were a dismal dream. Grandmother was
sitting there in God's bright sunshine and reading aloud from the
Bible. "Except ye become as little children, ye shall in no wise enter
the Kingdom of Heaven."

And Kay and Gerda looked into each other's eyes, and all at once they
understood the old hymn:

    _The roses grow in the valley
    Where we meet the Jesus Child._

There they both sat, grown up and yet children, children at heart; and
it was summer, warm delightful summer.




[End of _The Snow Queen_ by Hans Christian Andersen, from
_Hans Andersen Forty-Two Stories_, translated by M. R. James]
